## The Role of Computer Science for Forest and Landscape Restoration

Recognizing that some critical aspects of modern society can never be fully
decarbonised, a shift to a net zero-carbon economy will necessarily require
some level of carbon capture and sequestration (CCS).  Many approaches to CCS
have been proposed, including [pumping CO2 into oil
wells](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1750583618304857) and
[trapping it as chalk
precipitate](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/352/6291/1312).  Perhaps
the simplest and least controversial way to accomplish this task is to [plant
trees](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01026-8).  To give an idea of
the scale involved, the median carbon sequestration potential of an
agroforestry system, which combines agriculture and forestry, is estimated to
be [about 95 metric tons (T) per
hectare](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167880903001385)
and, if left undisturbed, can [trap this CO2 for
decades](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12914) or even centuries.

This is roughly the equivalent of the emissions from [10 UK households in one
year](https://www.theccc.org.uk).  Recent work suggests that the earth has the
potential to [sustain a trillion more
trees](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/365/6448/76) planted in
approximately 900 million hectares of currently denuded land, with a carbon
sequestration potential of 205 GT, which is comparable to anthropogenic
emissions of [1500 GT to
date](https://www.osti.gov/dataexplorer/biblio/dataset/1389323).  Thus,
technological interventions to promote reforestation are an attractive approach
to mitigate anthropogenic climate change.

In addition to carbon sequestration, forests provide many other benefits both
to the environment and to humans. Environmental benefits include air
purification, flood prevention, slope stabilization, and increasing
bio-diversity. Human benefits include jobs in forestry and agroforestry,
improving public health, providing food (such as chestnuts), and providing a
source of sustainable building materials.  For these reasons, reforestation has
become a topic of great current interest, with the World Economic Forum
announcing in January 2020 an initiative to plant [1 trillion trees](https://www.trilliontrees.org).  Similarly, the [Plant for the Planet](https://www.plant-for-the-planet.org/en/home) initiative also aims to plant 1 trillion trees, with more than 13.5 billion planted so far.

However, reforestation is not simply a matter of
planting saplings or seeds in the ground:
 
- Reforestation guided purely by economic criteria results
  in monoculture plantations that can [neither sequester carbon for
  the long term](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-01026-8) nor [support biodiversity](https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/content/documents/2018/lamb-2018-restoration_ecology.pdf). They also lack resilience to disease, pests, and climate change.
  
- Successful tree-planting, but of fast-growing species such as pine or
  eucalyptus, can result in not only [draining of the water table](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652616301147) but also [increased fire risk](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/2019/04/how-to-regrow-forest-right-way-minimize-fire-water-use/).

- A top-down technocratic approach that ignores the land's owners and other local actors
  (who may even have been responsible for deforestation in the first place) is frequently [doomed to failure](https://doi.org/10.1177/2514848618812029).

- Even multi-species, long-term reforestation motivated by climate credits may encourage fraud due to [lack of trustworthy monitoring](https://features.propublica.org/brazil-carbon-offsets/inconvenient-truth-carbon-credits-dont-work-deforestation-redd-acre-cambodia/).
 
Fortunately, over the past two decades, practitioners in the discipline of
Forest and Landscape Restoration (FLR) have developed a deep understanding of
reforestation approaches that balance the needs of the environment and local
actors.  At the risk of oversimplification, this work can be
summarized as follows.

First, for ecological restoration and carbon sequestration, as opposed to mere
tree harvesting, it is important to combine appropriate policies (such as a
guarantee of long-term land tenure) with institutional frameworks (such as
participatory management of communal forests).  Importantly, reforestation
outcomes must be economically sustainable for all stakeholders.  To ensure
this, local actors must be engaged participants in the planning process.

Second, there is a dire need for the improved monitoring of trees, other
vegetation, soil, and wood products at all spatial scales. This monitoring can
not only help identify degraded lands and the best approach for forest
regeneration but also help evaluate forest health, raise the alarm for
interventions and provide a basis for reliable administration of carbon credit
payments.

These two areas are precisely where computer science, broadly speaking, can
help FLR practitioners, especially when there is a need for very large scale.
Our work in UCTrees is to figure out the potential areas for CS-based
interventions, along with some initial research opportunities to demonstrate
the great potential for CS work in this area.  Note that some interventions can
reuse existing computational tools, while others may require fundamentally new
techniques in Computer Science. 
